smithyformula(5) -- writing formulas for smithy
===============================================

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The main goal of formulas is to consolidate all knowledge required to build a
software package. This can include:

* defining dependencies
* loading or swapping modules
* setting environment variables
* applying patches
* creating or changing makefiles
* running the compilation
* running tests
* defining a modulefile

Once written it's easy to see everything required to build a given piece of
software. Reproducing those steps is as simple as running one command but only
if the formula is as complete as possible.

It's common for build scripts to run the compilation but omit patches, changes
to makefile, or any other modification to the source. With formulas it's easy to
make patches and output any files needed to compile software.

CREATING NEW FORMULAS
---------------------

The best way to create a new formula is to start with a working example. There
are many complete working examples in the [smithy_formulas
repo](https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy_formulas).

If you want to create a new formula from scratch you can use the `smithy formula
new` subcommand. For more info on this command run `smithy help formula new`. To
create a new formula file you need to know the homepage and a url to download
the file. To create a new formula for subversion you might run:

    smithy formula new \
      --name=subversion \
      --homepage=http://subversion.apache.org/ \
      http://mirror.cogentco.com/pub/apache/subversion/subversion-1.7.8.tar.bz2

The format of the new sub-command is `smithy formula new [command options] URL`.
The options and arguments are:

  * `--name`:
    This is the name used for the formula file and class, if omitted smithy will
    try to guess the name based on the download URL

  * `--homepage`:
    This should be the main homepage for the software

  * `URL`:
    A download URL for the software, this argument is required but may be "none"
    if you plan to checkout the code through a version control system or copy
    from another location as part of the formula

This will create a formula file inside `~/.smithy/formulas` or the first formula
directory specified in the `$SMITHY_CONFIG` file. In either case, the full path
to that file will be displayed.

STRUCTURE
---------

Formulas attempt to create a domain specific language with the support of a full
programming language, ruby. The structure of a formula is the same as a ruby class.
For example:

    class SubversionFormula < Formula

    end

Every method call that defines the formula will happen between these two lines.

### FORMULA FILE AND CLASS NAMING

Formulas follow a specifc naming scheme. The filename should end in
`'_formula.rb'` and start with the name of the software in all lowercase
characters. The class name should be the same name specified in the file but
[CamelCased](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase) and end in `'Formula'`.

### RUBY BASICS

We will cover most of the basics you need for formula writing here but if you
would like more info on ruby you might read through [Ruby in Twenty
Minutes](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/quickstart/) or try another
source on the [Ruby Documentation](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/)
page.

FORMULA DSL METHODS
-------------------

These methods should be defined at the highest level of the formula file, right
after the `class GitFormula < Formula` line.

### homepage
**REQUIRED** - Defines the homepage, e.g. "http://git-scm.com/"

### url
**REQUIRED** - The full URL to download a package, e.g.
"http://git-core.googlecode.com/files/git-1.8.3.4.tar.gz" may also be "none"

### sha1,sha256,md5
A hash of the downloaded file to verify the download performed correctly, e.g.
`sha1 "fe633d02f7d964842d7ea804278b75120fc60c11"`

### version
Manually define the version number, if omitted smithy will guess the version
number from the url. This works best when the filename in a url follows the
name-version.tar... format. If a url does not follow that format then manually
specifying the version with the [version][] method works best.

### supported_build_names
This method takes any number of strings or regexes. When used smithy will check
the supplied [build_name][] and validate it against what is specified under
[supported_build_names][]. If the [build_name][] does not match a string or
regex the install is aborted.

This is useful for when a formula must have specific build names in order to
install correctly. For example, using the this line in a formula:

    supported_build_names "python2.7", "python3"

And running `smithy formula install python_nose/1.3.4/python2.6` (note
`python2.6` does not match anything in the [supported_build_names][] line
above). Then smithy will output the following abort the install:

    ==> PythonNoseFormula supported build names:
      python2.7
      python3
    ==> ERROR: use a build_name that includes any of the above patterns

When using strings with [supported_build_names][] smithy will check to see if
the [build_name][] contains any supplied substrings.

If using regexes they must simply match the build name. Here is an example using
regexes:

    supported_build_names /python.*gnu/

That regex checks for `python` followed by any number of characters followed by
`gnu`. When running `smithy formula install python_numpy/1.9.2/python2.7.9` with the
above you should see:

    ==> PythonNumpyFormula supported build names:
      python.*gnu
    ==> ERROR: use a build_name that includes any of the above patterns

### params
This method is used to specify some unchanging variables you would like to use
in any block throughout the formula. It can be useful if you want some variables
located at the top of the formula file that are easily changed. It takes a hash
where the keys are variable names and the values are the variable contents. For
example:

    class ExampleFormula do
      homepage "http://example.com"
      url "http://example.com/example-1.2.3.tar.gz"

      params example_api_version: "1.0",
             build_folder: "example1.0"

      def install
        system "./configure --api-version #{example_api_version} --build-dir #{build_folder}"
      end
    end

### concern for_version("1.2.3") do

Concerns are used allow formulas to support multiple versions. When used, their
contents will override the same methods defined at the root level of a formula
class. They are a part of the [ActiveSupport Concerning
Module](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/Module/Concerning.html)

To specify a concern for version 1.2.3 of a package add the following to a
formula (replacing the comment with the methods you would like to override).


    concern for_version("1.2.3") do
      included do
        # override methods here
      end
    end

Anything formula DSL method can be overridden including [def install][].

Here is an example of a python formula that supports version `2.7.9` and
`3.4.3`. The concern only overrides the download urls and md5s.

    class PythonFormula < Formula
      homepage "www.python.org/"

      depends_on "sqlite"

      module_commands ["unload python"]

      concern for_version("2.7.9") do
        included do
          url "https://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.9/Python-2.7.9.tgz"
          md5 "5eebcaa0030dc4061156d3429657fb83"
        end
      end

      concern for_version("3.4.3") do
        included do
          url "https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.4.3/Python-3.4.3.tgz"
          md5 "4281ff86778db65892c05151d5de738d"
        end
      end

      def install
        module_list
        ENV["CPPFLAGS"] = "-I#{sqlite.prefix}/include"
        ENV["LDFLAGS"]  = "-L#{sqlite.prefix}/lib"
        system "./configure --prefix=#{prefix} --enable-shared"
        system "make"
        system "make install"
      end
    end

Using the above formula it is possible to install python with the following and
smithy will download the correct tarball for each version:

    smithy formula install python/2.7.9/sles11.3_gnu4.3.4
    smithy formula install python/3.4.3/sles11.3_gnu4.3.4

### disable_group_writable
Calling this method within the formula will skip setting group writable file
permissions after the build is complete. It's equivalent to running smithy with
the `--disable-group-writable` option. See `smithy help` for more info on global
command line options.

### depends_on
This method expects either a single string or an array of strings that define
dependencies for this formula. e.g.

    depends_on "curl"
    depends_on [ "cmake", "qt", "openssl", "sqlite" ]
    depends_on %w{ cmake qt openssl sqlite }

Using this method ensures that if a given dependency is not met smithy will
abort the installation. It also provides a way to query dependent packages
information within the install method later on. For example if you write
`depends_on "curl"` in your formula you gain access to an object named curl
inside the install method. This allows you to do things like:

    system "./configure --prefix=#{prefix} --with-curl=#{curl.prefix}"

In the above example `#{curl.prefix}` is an example of a ruby interpolated
string, everything between the `#{ }` is ruby code. `curl.prefix` will return a
string with the location curl is installed in.

The strings passed to `depends_on` are just the locations of installed software.
If you required a specific version of a dependency you could use specify the
version or build numbers of existing installed software. e.g.

    depends_on [ "cmake/2.8.11.2/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4", "qt/4.8.5", "sqlite" ]

Assuming your software root is `/sw/xk6` smithy would look for the above
software installs in `/sw/xk6/cmake/2.8.11.2/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4`
`/sw/xk6/qt/4.8.5/*` and `/sw/xk6/sqlite/*/*`. The `*` works similar to shell
globbing. If you needed to install a python module that depends on a specific
version of another python module you might use:

    depends_on [ "python/3.3.0", "python_numpy/1.7.1/*python3.3.0*" ]

This would require a given formula to have access to both
`/sw/xk6/python/3.3.0/*` and a python module with a build name that includes
`python3.3.0` located at `/sw/x6/python_numpy/1.7.1/*python3.3.0*`

You will also probably need to specifiy dependencies conditionally upon the type
of build you are performing. It's recommended to add the type of build to the
build name when installing. Given that, you can key off build names to specify
dependencies. Taking the python example further, lets extend it to support
multiple versions of python. You can pass a ruby block to the `depends_on`
method to make it more dynamic. The syntax for this is:

    depends_on do
      ...
    end

Any ruby code may go in here the last executed line of the block should be an
array of strings containting the dependencies. Lets use a ruby case statement
for this:

    depends_on do
      case build_name
      when /python3.3/
        [ "python/3.3.0", "python_numpy/1.7.1/*python3.3.0*" ]
      when /python2.7/
        [ "python/2.7.3", "python_numpy/1.7.1/*python2.7.3*" ]
      end
    end

In this example case statement switches on the `build_name`. The `when
/python3.3/` will be true if the `build_name` contains the `python3.3`. The
`/python3.3/` syntax is a regular expression.

This allows the formula to set it's dependencies based off the type of build
thats being performed. Lets say this formula is `python_matplotlib`. You could
run either of these commands to install it and expect the dependencies to be set
correctly:

    smithy formula install python_matplotlib/1.2.3/python3.3.0
    smithy formula install python_matplotlib/1.2.3/python2.7.3

### module_commands

This method defines the module commands that must be run before [system][] calls
within the [def install][] part of the modulefile. It expects an array of
strings with each string being a module command. e.g.

    module_commands [ "load szip", "load hdf5" ]

A more complicated example:

    module_commands [
      "unload PE-gnu PE-pgi PE-intel PE-cray",
      "load PE-gnu",
      "load cmake/2.8.11.2",
      "load git",
      "swap gcc gcc/4.7.1",
      "swap ompi ompi/1.6.3"
    ]

`module_commands` also accepts ruby blocks the syntax for this is:

    module_commands do
      ...
    end

This can be used to dynamically set which modules to load based on the
`build_name`. Here is an example that loads the correct python version:

    module_commands do
      commands = [ "unload python" ]

      case build_name
      when /python3.3/
        commands << "load python/3.3.0"
      when /python2.7/
        commands << "load python/2.7.3"
      end

      commands << "load python_numpy"
      commands << "load szip"
      commands << "load hdf5/1.8.8"
      commands
    end

This block starts by creating a variable named `commands` as an array with a
single item `"unload python"`. Next a case statement is used to determine which
version of python we are compiling for. `commands << "load python/3.3.0"` will
append `"load python/3.3.0"` to the end of the array. See the ruby documentation
on the [Array Class method](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/Array.html#method-i-3C-3C) for more
info on the `<<` operator. After that, it appends a few more modules to load.
The last line of the block must be the array itself so that when the block is
evaluated by smithy, it recieves the expected value.

Assuming this is a formula for `python_h5py` running `smithy formula install
python_h5py/2.1.3/python3.3` results in an array containing: `[ "unload python",
"load python/3.3.0", "load python_numpy", "load szip", "load hdf5/1.8.8" ]`

### modules

This command is similar to the [module_commands][] method. It accepts an array
of strings with the names of modulefiles that must be loaded. It's different
from [module_commands][] in that it expects only names of modules and loads them
in the order specified. Additionally it runs a `module purge` to unload all
modules before loading the passed array of modules. e.g.

    modules [ "java" ]

This line would run `module purge` and `module load java` before any [system][]
command. [modules][] also accepts ruby blocks similar to [module_commands][] and
[depends_on][]. Here is an example using ruby blocks:

  modules do
    mods = [ ]
    case build_name
    when /gnu/
      mods << "PrgEnv-gnu"
    when /pgi/
      mods << "PrgEnv-pgi"
    when /intel/
      mods << "PrgEnv-intel"
    when /cray/
      mods << "PrgEnv-cray"
    end
    mods
  end

This block would result in the formula running `module purge` followed by
`module load PrgEnv-gnu` if the `build_name` contains gnu and similarly for pgi,
intel, and cray.

### modulefile

This method expects the a string that represents the modulefile. Generally
modulefiles in smithy take two forms ones that point to a single build and ones
that use multiple builds and set the build based on a users environment (already
loaded modules). It's recommended to have one modulefile per application version
and set multiple builds dynamically inside the modulefile.

Writing modulefiles is a topic in and of itself. For details on the modulefile
format see the [modulefile(4)
manpage](http://modules.sourceforge.net/man/modulefile.html) Modulefiles are
written in tcl and can take many forms.

Here is an example of a modulefile that points to a single build. It's
convenient to use heredoc string quoting in ruby so that the string can span
multiple lines. e.g.

    modulefile <<-MODULEFILE.strip_heredoc
      #%Module
      proc ModulesHelp { } {
         puts stderr "<%= @package.name %> <%= @package.version %>"
         puts stderr ""
      }
      module-whatis "<%= @package.name %> <%= @package.version %>"

      set PREFIX <%= @package.prefix %>

      prepend-path PATH            $PREFIX/bin
      prepend-path LD_LIBRARY_PATH $PREFIX/lib
      prepend-path MANPATH         $PREFIX/share/man
    MODULEFILE

The `<<-MODULEFILE.strip_heredoc` syntax denotes the beginning for a multi-line
string. The string ends with `MODULEFILE`. You can substitute any word for
`MODULEFILE`. The `.strip_heredoc` method removes leading whitespace from the
string so the output isn't unecessarily indented.

The modulefile definition uses the [erb
format](http://ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.0/libdoc/erb/rdoc/ERB.html) Anything
between the `<%= ... %>` delimiters will be interpreted as ruby code. There are
a few helper methods that you can use inside these delimiters see the next
section titled [MODULEFILE HELPER METHODS][] for details.

A more complicated modulefile may examine already loaded modules to determine
which build to load. For instance if the user has gcc or a gnu programming
environment module loaded then your modulefile will want to load the gnu build.
Here is an example designed to dynamically set the build:

    #%Module
    proc ModulesHelp { } {
       puts stderr "<%= @package.name %> <%= @package.version %>"
       puts stderr ""
    }
    # One line description
    module-whatis "<%= @package.name %> <%= @package.version %>"

    <% if @builds.size > 1 %>
    <%= module_build_list @package, @builds %>

    set PREFIX <%= @package.version_directory %>/$BUILD
    <% else %>
    set PREFIX <%= @package.prefix %>
    <% end %>

    # Helpful ENV Vars
    setenv <%= @package.name.upcase %>_DIR $PREFIX
    setenv <%= @package.name.upcase %>_LIB "-L$PREFIX/lib"
    setenv <%= @package.name.upcase %>_INC "-I$PREFIX/include"

    # Common Paths
    prepend-path PATH            $PREFIX/bin
    prepend-path LD_LIBRARY_PATH $PREFIX/lib
    prepend-path MANPATH         $PREFIX/share/man
    prepend-path INFOPATH        $PREFIX/info
    prepend-path PKG_CONFIG_PATH $PREFIX/lib/pkgconfig
    prepend-path PYTHONPATH      $PREFIX/lib/python2.7/site-packages
    prepend-path PERL5PATH       $PREFIX/lib/perl5/site_perl

The main difference from the first example is the `<%= if @builds.size > 1 %>`
block. This basically checks to see if we have installed multiple builds or
not. If that condition is true everything up until the `<% else %>` will be put
in the modulefile. Otherwise, if we have only one build, `set PREFIX <%=
@package.prefix %>` will be put in the modulefile.

### def install

**REQUIRED** - This is the method that runs the software installation process. It normally runs system commands, performs patches, and sets environment variables. e.g.

    def install
      system "./configure"
      system "make"
      system "make install"
    end

The contents of the install method depends heavily on the software being
installed. For a list of additional helper methods for use inside install see
the [FORMULA HELPER METHODS][] section.

### additional_software_roots

This method takes an array of strings (or a block that returns an array of
strings) containing paths to additional software root directories. This is
useful for when you have a package that must be installed to two or more
separate locations. The source is still extracted to one location and the
compilation is performed there. The [def install][] method is just executed
again with the additional prefixes. For example say our formula contained the
line:

    additional_software_roots ["/lustre/atlas/sw"]

Then when we run `smithy formula install python_numpy/1.9.2/python2.7.9` then
python will still be installed to the default prefix of
`/sw/xk6/python_numpy/1.9.2/python2.7.9` It will also get installed to
`/lustre/atlas/sw/xk6/python_numpy/1.9.2/python2.7.9`

You can combine this with [config_value][] to generalize you formulas further.
Say we always need to know where software gets installed on the lustre
filesystem. We can add this line to the config file: `lustre-filesystem:
/lustre/atlas/sw` and in out formulas say:

    additional_software_roots [ config_value("lustre-filesystem") ]

FORMULA HELPER METHODS
----------------------

These methods are designed to be used within the [def install][] method of a
formula file or within a block passed to one [FORMULA DSL METHODS][].

### name
This will return the name of the application being installed. It is the same as
the APPLICATION part of the smithy formula install APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD
command. It can be used as a variable as well as inside of a string using the
`#{ ... }` delimiters. e.g. `"#{name}"`

### version
Similar to the above, this returns the version number.

### build_name
Same as the name and version methods, this will return the build name of the
applcation.

### prefix
This line will return the full prefix to an application. If we run smithy
formula install bzip2/1.0.4/pgi13.4 and our software-root is /sw/xk6 this
command will return /sw/xk6/bzip2/1.0.4/pgi13.4

### hostname
This method will return the hostname of the machine smithy is running on.

### arch
This method will return the current architecture specified in the config file
for the current hostname. For example if the config file contains:

    ---
    software-root: /sw
    file-group-name: ccsstaff
    hostname-architectures:
      titan-ext: xk6
      titan-login: xk6

And you run smithy on `titan-ext1` then `arch` will return `xk6`

### cray_linux_version
If smithy is running on a cray system this method will return the Cray Linux
Environment version. Otherwise it will return false.

### cray_system?
This method will return true if smithy is running on a cray system.

### config_value
This method lets you retrieve arbitrary values from the `$SMITHY_CONFIG` file.
Since that file is in [YAML](http://yaml.org/) format you can easily append
extra values for use in your formulas.

For example, if your system has a specific path for a filesystem your formula
needs to know about then you can add it you the config file. Say we add a line
titled `lustre-filesystem`:

    ---
    software-root: /sw
    file-group-name: ccsstaff
    hostname-architectures:
      titan-ext: xk6
      titan-login: xk6
    lustre-filesystem: /lustre/atlas/sw

You can then call `config_value("lustre-filesystem")` in your formulas and get
`/lustre/atlas/sw` back.

### system

This method accepts a string or multiple strings separated by commas. It will
run the given command in a subshell and setup the modules as defined by the
[module_commands][] or [modules][] methods. Each call to system is independent
from the last. Modules are reloaded and environment variables are reset.

### system_python
The [system_python][] method runs `python` using a [system][] command and sets
the `PYTHONPATH` environment variable to a location in the current [prefix][].
This is useful for running a `setup.py` for a python module. It is designed to
be used like:

    system_python "setup.py install --prefix=#{prefix} --compile"

Under the hood it is running:

    system "PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:#{prefix}/lib/#{python_libdir(current_python_version)}/site-packages python",
      "setup.py install --prefix=#{prefix} --compile"

Where `python_libdir(current_python_version)` is the lib directory for the
version of python in the `$PATH` e.g. `python2.7` or `python3.4`

### python_module_from_build_name
This is a helper to change a full python version specified in the [build_name][]
e.g. `python2.7.9` or `python3.4.3` to a version with a forward slash e.g.
`python/2.7.9` or `python/3.4.3` respectively.

It is useful for when a formula is installed with a python version in the
[build_name][] and you want to get the corresponding python version string for
use in a [module_commands][] or [depends_on][] block. For example:

    depends_on do
      python_module_from_build_name
    end

    module_commands do
      [ "unload python",
        "load #{python_module_from_build_name}" ]
    end

If the above is used when installing a formula with `python2.7.9` in the build
name e.g. `smithy formula install python_numpy/1.9.2/python2.7.9_gnu4.8.2` then
[python_module_from_build_name][] will return `python/2.7.9`.

### python_version_from_build_name
Like [python_module_from_build_name][], this is a helper to extract the python
version from the [build_name][]. It is useful when a formula is installed with
a python version in the [build_name][] and you want to get the corresponding
python version string for use in a [depends_on][] block. For example:

    depends_on "python_numpy/1.9.2/#{python_version_from_build_name}*"

If the above is used when installing a formula with `python2.7.9` in the [build_name][]
 e.g. `smithy formula install python_scipy/0.15.1/python2.7.9_gnu4.8.2` then
[python_version_from_build_name][] will return `python2.7.9`.

### python_libdir(version)
This method will extract the major and minor version numbers for the python
version being installed. This is only useful for the [python
formula](https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy_formulas/blob/master/python_formula.rb).
It is useful when referencing the python libdir, which is shared among different
patch versions. When installing python/3.4.3/sles11.1_gnu4.8.2 the result of
`python_libdir(version)` will be `python3.4`.

### module_list
This method will run `module list` and print it's output durring the install
process. Useful for verifying the modules loaded are the ones you want.

### module_is_available?
This method will check if a given modulename is available on the system you are
performing the installation on. It takes one string argument, the module name.
It can be used within the [def install][], [depends_on][], [module_commands][],
or [modules][] methods.

    if module_is_available?("hdf5/1.8.8")
      ...
    end

### module_environment_variable
Using this method will return the contents of an environment varible set by a
modulefile. It takes two string arguments, the module name and the environment
variable name. For example, if you wished to get the value of the `$HDF5_DIR`
variable set within the `hdf5/1.8.8` module you could run:

    hdf5_prefix = module_environment_variable("hdf5/1.8.8", "HDF5_DIR")

Using this method to get environment variable set by modules is necessary since
the modules are only set before running a [system][] command. See [Setting
Environment Variables][] for more info.  It can be used within the [def
install][], [depends_on][], [module_commands][], or [modules][] methods.

By combining the [module_is_available?][] and [module_environment_variable][]
methods you can conditionally retrieve the contents of environment variables set
within a given module.

    if module_is_available?("hdf5/1.8.8")
      hdf5_prefix = module_environment_variable("hdf5/1.8.8", "HDF5_DIR")
    end

### patch

The patch method is a convinience method to apply patches to code. Behind the
scenes it creates a file named `patch.diff` with the passed content and runs
`patch -p1 <patch.diff`. Using the heredoc syntax works best to strip leading
whitespace. For example:

    patch <<-EOF.strip_heredoc
      diff --git a/CMake/cdat_modules/cairo_external.cmake b/CMake/cdat_modules/cairo_external.cmake
      index e867fb2..22fb40c 100644
      --- a/CMake/cdat_modules/cairo_external.cmake
      +++ b/CMake/cdat_modules/cairo_external.cmake
      @@ -1,7 +1,7 @@

       set(Cairo_source "${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/build/Cairo")
       set(Cairo_install "${cdat_EXTERNALS}")
      -set(Cairo_conf_args --disable-static)
      +set(Cairo_conf_args --enable-gobject=no --disable-static)

       ExternalProject_Add(Cairo
         DOWNLOAD_DIR ${CDAT_PACKAGE_CACHE_DIR}
    EOF

Any input you provide must be compatible with the patch command. You can use
interpolated strings `#{ ... }` to modify the content of patches as well:

    patch <<-EOF.strip_heredoc
      diff --git a/Makefile.in b/Makefile.in
      new file mode 100644
      index 0000000..1235d4b
      --- /dev/null
      +++ b/Makefile.in
      @@ -0,0 +1,12 @@
      +SHELL = /bin/sh
      +PLAT = LINUX
      +BLLIB = #{acml_prefix}/gfortran64/lib/libacml.a
      +CBLIB = #{prefix}/lib/libcblas.a
      +CC = gcc
      +FC = gfortran
      +LOADER = $(FC)
      +CFLAGS = -O3 -DADD_
      +FFLAGS = -O3
      +ARCH = ar
      +ARCHFLAGS = r
      +RANLIB = ranlib
    EOF

PYTHON SPECIFIC HELPERS
-----------------------

Python module installations require some extra consideration. To make life a bit
easier Smithy provides the following methods.

* [python_module_from_build_name][]
* [python_version_from_build_name][]
* [python_libdir(version)](#python_libdir-version-)
* [system_python][]
* [`<%= python_module_build_list @package, @builds %>`](#-python_module_build_list-package-builds-)


MODULEFILE HELPER METHODS
-------------------------

### `<%= @package.name %>`

This will return the name of the application being installed. It is the same as
the APPLICATION part of the `smithy formula install APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD`
command.

### `<%= @package.version %>`

Similar to the above, this returns the version number.

### `<%= @package.build_name %>`

Same as the name and version methods, this will return the build name of the
applcation.

### `<%= @package.prefix %>`

This line will return the full prefix to an application. If we run `smithy
formula install bzip2/1.0.4/pgi13.4` and our software-root is `/sw/xk6` this
command will return `/sw/xk6/bzip2/1.0.4/pgi13.4`

### `<%= @builds %>`

The `@builds` variable is an array of strings that contain the list of available
builds for a given application. Say we have a bzip2 formula and ran the
following installs:

    smithy formula install bzip2/1.0.4/gnu4.3.4
    smithy formula install bzip2/1.0.4/gnu4.7.2
    smithy formula install bzip2/1.0.4/pgi13.4
    smithy formula install bzip2/1.0.4/intel12

The directory structure for the above builds would look like (assuming `/sw/xk6`
is the software-root):

    /sw/xk6/bzip2/1.0.4
    `--- modulefile
    |  `--- bzip2
    |     `--- 1.0.4
    `--- gnu4.3.4
    |  `--- bin
    |  `--- include
    |  `--- lib
    |  `--- source
    |  `--- share
    `--- gnu4.7.2
    |  `--- bin
    |  `--- include
    |  `--- lib
    |  `--- source
    |  `--- share
    `--- pgi13.4
    |  `--- bin
    |  `--- include
    |  `--- lib
    |  `--- source
    |  `--- share
    `--- intel12
       `--- bin
       `--- include
       `--- lib
       `--- source
       `--- share

The `@builds` array would then be `[ "gnu4.3.4", "gnu4.7.2", "pgi13.4",
"intel12" ]`. This lets you figure out what builds exist and use them in your
modulefile.

### `<%= @builds.size %>`

[size](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/Array.html#method-i-size) is a standard ruby
method that counts the number of elements in an array. For the above example
this would return `4`.

### `<%= module_build_list @package, @builds %>`

This is a helper method that will generate the tcl necessary to conditionally
load builds based on what compiler programming environment modules a user has
loaded. It takes `@package` and `@builds` as arguments.  Using the above bzip2
example the result of using this method would be:

    if [ is-loaded PrgEnv-gnu ] {
      if [ is-loaded gcc/4.3.4 ] {
        set BUILD gnu4.3.4
      } elseif [ is-loaded gcc/4.7.2 ] {
        set BUILD gnu4.7.2
      } else {
        set BUILD gnu4.7.2
      }
    } elseif [ is-loaded PrgEnv-pgi ] {
      set BUILD pgi13.4
    } elseif [ is-loaded PrgEnv-intel ] {
      set BUILD intel12
    } elseif [ is-loaded PrgEnv-cray ] {
      puts stderr "Not implemented for the cray compiler"
    }
    if {![info exists BUILD]} {
      puts stderr "[module-info name] is only available for the following environments:"
      puts stderr "gnu4.3.4"
      puts stderr "gnu4.7.2"
      puts stderr "intel12"
      puts stderr "pgi13.4"
      break
    }

### `<%= python_module_build_list @package, @builds %>`

This method is similar to the previously mentioned [module_build_list][] except
that it will create a block specific to python versions. It requires that a full
python version be part of the current build name e.g. `python2.7.9`. It will
look at the builds installed for the current formula and create a corresponding
tcl if block. It will also check to see if python modules exist that correspond to
the build names.

For example, lets assume we perform the following installs for the
[python_numpy](https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy_formulas/blob/master/python_numpy_formula.rb)
formula:

    smithy formula install python_numpy/1.9.2/python2.7.9_gnu4.8.2
    smithy formula install python_numpy/1.9.2/python3.4.3_gnu4.8.2

Then the following builds will exist:

    python_numpy
    `--- 1.9.2
       `--- python2.7.9_gnu4.8.2
       `--- python3.4.3_gnu4.8.2

If the `python/2.7.9` and `python/3.4.3` modules exist then
[python_module_build_list][] method will create the following output:

    if [ is-loaded python/2.7.9 ] {
      set BUILD python2.7.9_gnu4.8.2
      set LIBDIR python2.7
    } elseif [ is-loaded python/3.4.3 ] {
      set BUILD python3.4.3_gnu4.8.2
      set LIBDIR python3.4
    }
    if {![info exists BUILD]} {
      puts stderr "[module-info name] is only available for the following environments:"
      puts stderr "python/2.7.9"
      puts stderr "python/3.4.3"
      break
    }

It is designed to be used like this:

    <%= python_module_build_list @package, @builds %>
    set PREFIX <%= @package.version_directory %>/$BUILD


### `<% if ... %>`
This is standard erb ruby code. Delimiters like `<% ... %>` do NOT put their
results in the final modulefile, they are only used for control flow. Delimiters
with the extra = sign `<%= ... %>` will put their results in the final
modulefile.

This is best used to conditionally render content to the modulefile and takes
the form:

    <% if @builds.size > 1 %>
      ...
    <% else %>
      ...
    <% end %>

Where `@builds.size > 1` can be any expression which returns true or false. If
the if condition is true then the lines between the if and else will be put in
the modulefile, otherwise lines between the else and end will be used.

COMMON OPERATIONS
-----------------

### Change Working Directory

Changing the working directory accomplished by the
[Dir.chdir](http://ruby-doc.org/core-1.9.3/Dir.html#method-c-chdir) method. It
takes one argument as a string. It's best to always work from the prefix of the
installation. You can concatenate strings using a `+` sign.

    Dir.chdir prefix
    Dir.chdir prefix+"/source"

### Running Shell Commands

In ruby you can execute any shell command using backtick delimiters. Commands
run using this method will NOT load any required modulefiles. It will however
return the standard output as a string

    `ln -svf file1 file2`
    results = `ln -svf file1 file2`

If you need modulefiles loaded use the [system][] command instead.

    system "ln -svf file1 file2"

There are many ruby methods available that are the equivalent of running the
shell counterparts. See the these pages for more info:

* [FileUtils Class](http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.0/libdoc/fileutils/rdoc/FileUtils.html)
* [Dir Class](http://ruby-doc.org/core-1.9.3/Dir.html)
* [File Class](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/File.html)

### Setting Environment Variables

Ruby provides the [ENV](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/ENV.html) hash for
accessing and setting environment variables. Here is an example of setting
environment variables:

    ENV["CC"]  = "gcc"
    ENV["CXX"] = "g++"
    ENV["F77"] = "gfortran"
    ENV["F90"] = "gfortran"
    ENV["FC"]  = "gfortran"

And getting their values back:

    cppflags = ENV["CPPFLAGS"]

This works with one caveat, you cannot access or modify variables set by modules
loaded by the formula. Modules are loaded and reset before each
[system][] command.

If you need to access the contents of an evironment variable set by a module use
the [module_environment_variable][] helper method.

If you need to change the contents of an environment variable set by a loaded
module you will need to make it part of the system command. For example, say you
loaded the `netcdf` module and needed to change the `$NETCDF_DIR` variable. You
could run any of these:

    system "NETCDF_DIR=/opt/cray/netcdf/4.2.0/generic ./configure"
    system "export NETCDF_DIR=/opt/cray/netcdf/4.2.0/generic ;",
      "./configure"
    system "export NETCDF_DIR=/opt/cray/netcdf/4.2.0/generic
      ./configure"

### Creating Files

Using ruby to create files is simple. With this and the `#{ ... }` delimiters
you can add dynamic content to the files you write. The basic syntax for writing
files is:

    File.open("path/to/file", "w+") do |file|
      file.write "..."
    end

This syntax uses a ruby block with an argument. `File.open("...", "w+")` passes
the file handle to the block as a variable named `file`. Between the `do |file|`
and `end` lines is the block. When ruby reaches the end of the block the file is
closed.

The `"w+"` argument tells ruby to open the file with read-write and truncate the
existing file to zero length or create a new file for reading and writing. See
[this page](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/IO.html#method-c-new-label-IO+Open+Mode)
for more info on the different modes.

Here is a good example from the
[mpi4py formula](https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy_formulas/blob/master/python_mpi4py_cray_formula.rb)

    File.open("mpi.cfg", "w+") do |f|
      f.write <<-EOF.strip_heredoc
        [cray]
        mpi_dir = /opt/cray/mpt/5.6.3/gni/mpich2-gnu/47
        mpicc   = cc
        mpicxx  = CC
      EOF
    end

This will create a new file named "mpi.cfg" in the current working directory. If
you wanted to make it a bit more dynamic you might wish to set the contents
based on an environment variable like this:

    mpidir = module_environment_variable("cray-mpich2", "CRAY_MPICH2_DIR")
    File.open("mpi.cfg", "w+") do |f|
      f.write <<-EOF.strip_heredoc
        [cray]
        mpi_dir = #{mpidir}
        mpicc   = cc
        mpicxx  = CC
      EOF
    end

### Putting it Together

You can combine these methods in many ways. This bit of code is from the
[uvcdat formula](https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy_formulas/blob/master/uvcdat_formula.rb)
and it creates symlinks from an openssl installation into a directory under the
uvcdat prefix.

    Dir.chdir prefix
    openssl_files = %w{
      include/openssl
      lib/pkgconfig/libcrypto.pc
      lib/pkgconfig/libssl.pc
      lib/pkgconfig/openssl.pc
      lib/engines
      lib/libcrypto.a
      lib/libcrypto.so
      lib/libcrypto.so.1.0.0
      lib/libssl.a
      lib/libssl.so
      lib/libssl.so.1.0.0
    }
    FileUtils.mkdir_p "Externals/include"
    FileUtils.mkdir_p "Externals/lib/pkgconfig"
    openssl_files.each do |file|
      system "ln -sf #{openssl.prefix}/#{file} #{prefix}/Externals/#{file}"
    end

It begins by changing the working directory to the installation prefix. Then,
creates an array of strings named `openssl_files` containing relative paths to files
needing to be symlinked. It then creates directories that might not exist yet
using
[FileUtils.mkdir_p](http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.0/libdoc/fileutils/rdoc/FileUtils.html#method-c-mkdir_p).
Then it iterates through the `openssl_files` array and runs one [system][]
command per array element. That system command uses an `openssl.prefix` method
that is made available by the [depends_on][] defined earlier in the formula to
get the location of the openssl installation.

SEE ALSO
--------

smithy(1)
