= <tt>smithy</tt>

Smithy will help you build, test, and distribute software with ease.

    smithy [global options] command_name [command-specific options] [--] arguments...

* Use the command +help+ to get a summary of commands
* Use the command <tt>help command_name</tt> to get a help for +command_name+
* Use <tt>--</tt> to stop command line argument processing; useful if your arguments have dashes in them

== Global Options
These options are available for any command and are specified before the name of the command

[<tt>--arch=NAME</tt>] Machine architecure to operate on
[<tt>--config-file=FILE</tt>] Alternate config file, also set by $SMITHY_CONFIG
[<tt>--disable-group-writable</tt>] Disable group writable file creation
[<tt>--file-group-name=GROUP</tt>] Group name for files created by smithy
[<tt>--help</tt>] Show this message
[<tt>--no-color</tt>] Don't use colors
[<tt>--software-root=PATH</tt>] The root level directory for software
[<tt>--web-root=PATH</tt>] The root level directory for web files
== Commands
[<tt>build</tt>] Build software
[<tt>edit</tt>] Edit package support files
[<tt>help</tt>] Shows list of commands or help for one command
[<tt>module</tt>] Manage modulefiles for a package
[<tt>new</tt>] Generate a new build and all necessary files
[<tt>publish</tt>] Publish packages to web
[<tt>repair</tt>] Repair a package
[<tt>search</tt>] Search currently installed software
[<tt>show</tt>] Display internal smithy values
[<tt>test</tt>] Test software

=== <tt>build PATH</tt>

Build software

The software to build may be either the absolute path or the full name of the software. The full name includes version numbers and build names using the format: NAME/VERSION/BUILD.

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>--disable-log</tt>] Disable logging
[<tt>-f, --force</tt>] Ignore .lock file and run anyway
[<tt>--log-name=FILE</tt>] Build log file name located within the software prefix. <i>( default: <tt>build.log</tt>)</i>
[<tt>-n, --dry-run</tt>] See what scripts will be run without running them
[<tt>-s, --suppress-stdout</tt>] Suppress messages from STDOUT.
=== <tt>edit build|test|env|modulefile NAME</tt>

Edit package support files

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>-e, --editor=BINARY</tt>] Editor for opening script files
[<tt>-s, --split</tt>] Split editing window with requested file and the environment (remodule) file
=== <tt>help [command]</tt>

Shows list of commands or help for one command

Gets help for the application or its commands.  Can also list the commands in a way helpful to creating a bash-style completion function

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>-c, --completion</tt>] List all commands one line at a time, for use with shell completion ([command] argument is partial command to match)
=== <tt>module create|use|deploy NAME</tt>

Manage modulefiles for a package

*Aliases*
* <tt><b>modulefile</b></tt>

smithy module create NAME/VERSION/BUILD

- Generate a modulefile for a given package. This operation normally happens after creating a new package. It is provided separately here for use with existing packages

smithy module use NAME/VERSION/BUILD

- Run the proper module command to add a package's modulefile to the MODULEPATH. This allows you to edit and test a modulefile in isolation. By adding the correct directory to MODULEPATH you may run module commands as you normally would.

smithy module deploy NAME/VERSION/BUILD

- Copy a package's modulefile to the system module path. This is typically done after you have tested a new module in isolation.

smithy module edit NAME/VERSION/BUILD

- alias for 'smithy edit modulefile'


==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>-n, --dry-run</tt>] See what files will be created without creating them
=== <tt>new NAME</tt>

Generate a new build and all necessary files

The new command will create all necessary files needed to add a new software package. Some care should be given to naming new packages. Some considerations are package names, version numbers, and build names. New package names should be of the format NAME/VERSION/BUILD

- NAME of the package should be all lower case and one word. If multiple words are necessary separate them with dashes '-'.

- VERSION numbers should be standard numbers separated by periods. If another format is necessary ensure that the numbers can be lexigraphically sorted in order of oldest release to newest.

- BUILD names should consist of two pieces of information separated by an underscore '_', the package's intended operating system and compiler.

EXAMPLES:

silo/4.8/sles11.1_gnu4.5.3
fftw/3.2.2/cle4.0_pgi11.10.0


==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>-n, --dry-run</tt>] See what files will be created when running new without creating them
[<tt>--skip-modulefile</tt>] Skip modulefile generation
[<tt>-t, --tarball=FILE</tt>] Provide a source tarball to unpack (optional)
[<tt>--web-description</tt>] Create description file for website
=== <tt>publish NAME</tt>

Publish packages to web

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>-n, --dry-run</tt>] See what files will be created without creating them
=== <tt>repair NAME</tt>

Repair a package

Repair permissions and check that files exist

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>-n, --dry-run</tt>] Verify permissions only
=== <tt>search PATTERN</tt>

Search currently installed software

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>--format=path|name|table|csv</tt>] Format of the output <i>( default: <tt>path</tt>)</i>
=== <tt>show last|arch</tt>

Display internal smithy values

smithy show last

- Display the package name used in the last smithy command. This is stored in the '~/.smithyrc' file.

smithy show arch

- List all architectures know to smithy.


=== <tt>test </tt>

Test software

==== Options
These options are specified *after* the command.

[<tt>--disable-log</tt>] Disable logging
[<tt>-f, --force</tt>] Ignore .lock file and run anyway
[<tt>--log-name=FILE</tt>] Test log file name located within the software prefix. <i>( default: <tt>test.log</tt>)</i>
[<tt>-n, --dry-run</tt>] See what scripts will be run without running them
[<tt>-s, --suppress-stdout</tt>] Suppress messages from STDOUT.
