smithy(1) -- build, test, and install software with ease
========================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`smithy` `new` APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD<br>
`smithy` `edit` APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD<br>
`smithy` `build` APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD<br>
`smithy` `formula install` APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD<br>

## DESCRIPTION

`smithy` is a command line software installation tool that borrows ideas heavily
from the excellent [homebrew](http://brew.sh/) package management system for Mac OS X and [SWTools](http://www.olcf.ornl.gov/center-projects/swtools/).

This is still a work in progress. If you have any questions, suggestions, or
encounter any errors please open an issue on github at
[https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy/issues](https://github.com/AnthonyDiGirolamo/smithy/issues).

## COMMAND LINE HELP

For help on all options and commands run `smithy help`<br>
For help on a specific command run `smithy help COMMAND` or `smithy help COMMAND SUBCOMMAND`

## SOFTWARE INSTALLATION METHODS

There are two ways of installing software using smithy:

* **build scripts** (similar to swtools)
* **formulas** (similar to homebrew)

## BUILD SCRIPTS

Build scripts are shell scripts that live inside of a package's PREFIX and
execute the steps required to perform the compilation. A hierarchy might look
something like this:

    /sw/xk6/subversion/1.6.17
    `--- sles11.1_gnu4.3.4
       |--- bin
       |--- build-notes
       |--- dependencies
       |--- include
       |--- lib
       |--- rebuild
       |--- relink
       |--- remodule
       |--- retest
       |--- share
       `--- subversion-1.6.17

The prefix for the above package is
`/sw/xk6/subversion/1.6.17/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4` within this directory you can see
the usual `bin/include/lib/share` folders. Additionally there is the source
directory `subversion-1.6.17` and three build scripts `rebuild`, `relink`, and
`remodule`. The `rebuild` script will compile the software and set the prefix
while the remodule script sets up the environment including loading modulefiles.

## FORMULAS

The Problem with build scripts is that they are duplicated for every software
installation. This makes installing new software difficult because you will have
to go back and look at old ones and copy relevant steps to a new rebuild script.
So much for don't repeat yourself!

An alternative is to use formulas. This idea is heavily borrowed from the
wonderful [homebrew](http://brew.sh/) package management system for Mac OS X.
With a formula you can specify the modules to load, extra package dependencies,
installation steps, and the modulefile in a single file. The formulas are
written in ruby and can be as flexible and dynamic as you like.

A package installed with a formula has a simpler prefix directory structure.
The only addition is the source files under the source directory.

    /sw/xk6/subversion/1.7.8
    `--- sles11.1_gnu4.3.4
       |--- bin
       |--- include
       |--- lib
       |--- source
       `--- share

## NAMING SOFTWARE BUILDS

All software builds have the following name format: **APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD**
That is three different parts separated by forward slashes `/` Each part consists of:

### APPLICATION
The name using lowercase characters

### VERSION
Numbers with periods. I recommend that whatever you choose as a version allows
it to be lexigraphically sorted from oldest to newest. For example use
2013-02-14 instead of Feb14-2013.

### BUILD
Build is somewhat different, it consists of the intended operating system and
compiler separated by underscores `_`. It is important to use compiler version
numbers that correspond to module versions. This will allow smithy to
auto-generate modulefiles for software with multiple builds.

`sles11.1_gnu4.6.2` corresponds to SuSE Linux Enterprise Server 11.1 and the GNU gcc compiler 4.6.2

`cle4.0_pgi12.1.0` corresponds to Cray Linux Environment 4.0 and the PGI 12.1.0 compile

You may also add any other details relevant to the build. For instance, add
python2.7 to the build name of a python module compiled for python2.7 and
python3.3 for python3.3.

## INSTALLATIONS WITH FORMULAS

For details on writing formulas please see the smithyformula(5) man page. This
section covers only how to install software using existing formulas.

Smithy formula sub-commands include:

* `new`:
  Create a new formula
* `list`:
  List known formulas
* `which`:
  Display a formula location
* `display`:
  Display a formula
* `install`:
  Install a package using a formula
* `create_modulefile`:
  Create a modulefile for a given package

Once a formula has been written installing is straightforward using the install
command. For example to install subversion to your software root under the
`subversion/1.7.8/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4` directory you might run:

    smithy formula install subversion/1.7.8/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4

See [NAMING SOFTWARE BUILDS][] for details on naming a software build.
The format of the install sub-command is: `smithy formula install [command
options] APPLICATION | APPLICATION/VERSION | APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD`. The options and arguments
include:

* `--[no-]clean`:
  This will delete all existing files in the target directory before performing
  the installation.
* `--formula-name`:
  By default smithy will guess the formula name based on the target directory
  APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD argument. You may wish you install to a location named
  differently than a formula. In this case, use `--formula-name` to define
  which formula to use.
* `APPLICATION | APPLICATION/VERSION | APPLICATION/VERSION/BUILD`:
  This is the destination directory that the software will be installed in. If
  you omit the BUILD or VERSION/BUILD directories smithy will try to guess the
  version based on the formula, and the build based on the operating system and
  version of gcc available. If in doubt, specify the full destination.

Assuming we install subversion with the previous command and our software-root
is `/sw/xk6/` the finished directory structure would look like:

    /sw/xk6/subversion/1.7.8
    |--- modulefile
    |  `--- subversion
    |     `--- 1.7.8
    `--- sles11.1_gnu4.3.4
       |--- bin
       |--- include
       |--- lib
       |--- source
       `--- share

A `modulefile` folder will be created alongside the `sles11.1_gnu4.3.4` build
directory so that the modulefile can be tested. To test the modulefile you need
to add the modulefile folder to the `$MODULEPATH` environment variable. Running
any of the following will do this:

    smithy module use last
    smithy module use subversion/1.7.8/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4
    module use /sw/xk6/subversion/1.7.8/modulefile/subversion

`last` is an alias to the last software build smithy worked on. `smithy show
last` will display the last build you worked on.

Once loaded, you should be able to interact with the new module file as normal
using:

    module avail subversion/1.7.8
    module display subversion/1.7.8
    module load subversion/1.7.8

You can now deploy the module to make it available to other users. This should
be done once you're confident the modulefile is working properly. To do so run
either:

    smithy module deploy last
    smithy module deploy subversion/1.7.8/sles11.1_gnu4.3.4

## INSTALLATIONS WITH BUILD SCRIPTS

This section shows the typical work-flow for adding a new software build using
build scripts. Let's imagine we want to install petsc 3.2 using the cray
compiler. We must create a place for the software build, build it, and create a
module.

### 1. Creating The Build

Let's use `petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1` as the name for our new package.  See
[NAMING SOFTWARE BUILDS][] for details on naming a software build.  This would
be petsc designed to run on a cle4.0 compute node and compiled with the cray cce
8.0.1 compiler.  This can be accomplished by running:

    smithy new petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1

You can save yourself some extra time by telling smithy where the source tar file for
petsc is:

    smithy new -t petsc-3.2-p7.tar.gz petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1

When using the `-t`, `--tarfile=` option smithy will extract the given archive
to the `source` directory. For the petsc example above this would be
`/sw/xk6/petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1/source`

The `-t` option can also download an archive from a given URL. The archive is
saved along side the source directory. As an example:

    smithy new -t http://ftp.mcs.anl.gov/pub/petsc/release-snapshots/petsc-3.2-p7.tar.gz petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1

This command will download petsc-3.2-p7.tar.gz, save it to
`/sw/xk6/petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1/petsc-3.2-p7.tar.gz` and extract it to
`/sw/xk6/petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1/source`. This feature requires the `curl`
command to work properly.

Additionally, if this is a brand new piece of software add the
`--web-description` switch. This will create the application description files
too.

### 2. Editing and Building the Software

Once you have created the build you may need to update the build (`rebuild`) and
environment (`remodule`) scripts before building the software. Both files live
within the software prefix. For our example it is located in
`/sw/xk6/petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1`. You can edit this and other related files
using the `edit` command:

    smithy edit build petsc/3.2/cle4.0_cray8.0.1

This is just a convenience command to editing the rebuild script. It will expect
the `$EDITOR` environment variable to be set to the edior of your choice. You
can alternatively use the `-e`,`--editor=` option. To make things quicker you
can run:

    smithy edit last

By omitting the build argument, smithy will prompt you to select the file to
edit.  The `last` argument will tell smithy to use the last software build it
worked with. If you are not sure what the last one is you can run `smithy show
last` to see.

Once you have edited the files, it's time to build. Do so by running:

    smithy build last

The results of the run will be shown on the screen and simultaneously logged to
`build.log` withing the software prefix folder.

### 3. Create and edit a modulefile

This step is best done after all builds for a particular application have been
created.  When you create a new software build a modulefile is created too.  For
our petsc install it lives in: `/sw/xk6/petsc/3.2/modulefile` All builds of a
particular application share a single modulefile.

Smithy does some guessing as to what should be inside the modulefile based on
what builds you have. If there is only one build the modulefile is relatively
simple. If you have multiple builds for different compilers then it will be more
complicated.

To be sure the modulefile is up to date on each build, regenerate it with:

    smithy module create last

Launch your editor with:

    smithy edit modulefile last

Add any relevant variables to your application. Next you will need to test it to
make sure it is loading properly for each build and that there are no errors.
You can add the modulefile to your `$MODULEPATH` using:

    smithy module use last

Now you are free to display and load it using the normal module commands:

    module avail      petsc
    module display    petsc/3.2
    module load       petsc/3.2

Once the modulefile is ready, you can copy it into place using:

    smithy module deploy last

For out petsc example, this command will copy
`/sw/xk6/petsc/3.2/modulefile/petsc/3.2` to `/sw/xk6/modulefiles/petsc/3.2`

### 4. Website Description

If this is a new application you will need to add some information to the
description file. For petsc this lives in: `/sw/xk6/petsc/description` This is
an html formatted file.  Alternatively, it can live in
`/sw/xk6/petsc/description.markdown` this file is in markdown format and is a
bit simpler to write than html. See [http://kramdown.rubyforge.org/quickref.html](http://kramdown.rubyforge.org/quickref.html)
for more information on markdown syntax. If both files exist, the markdown file
takes precedence.

If the description file is missing you can generate one by running:

    smithy repair last

To publish to the website run:

    smithy publish petsc

## SMITHY CONFIG FILE

To see an up to date example of what a smithy config file should look like run
`smithy show example_config`. Most of the options specified in a config file can
be overridden by global command line  options. See `smithy help` for info on
global command line options. The smithy config file uses the
[yaml](http://www.yaml.org/) syntax and looks something like this:

    ---
    software-root: /sw
    download-cache: /sw/sources
    formula-directories:
    - /sw/tools/smithy/formulas
    - /sw/tools/smithy/another_formula_directory
    global-error-log: /sw/tools/smithy/exceptions.log
    file-group-name: ccsstaff
    descriptions-root: /sw/descriptions
    web-root: /sw/descriptions_in_html
    web-architecture-names:
      xk6: titan
      xk7: titan
      analysis-x64: lens
      smoky: smoky
    hostname-architectures:
      everest-login: redhat6
      everest: redhat6
      lens: analysis-x64
      sith-login: redhat6
      sith: redhat6
      smoky-login: smoky
      titan-login: xk6
      titan-ext: xk6
      yona-login: yona
      yona: yona

### software-root

This option defines the top level directory used as the location of architecture
directories. Good choices might be `/opt/smithy` or `/usr/local/smithy`.
Someplace under your home directory would work too.

### file-group-name

Software compiled with smithy is intended to be group writable so that more that
one user may install software in the same location. This option defines the
group name used for installing software.

### hostname-architectures

This option defines what hostnames map to which architecture directories. Smithy
will use the mapped directories whenever it is run on machines with hostnames
specified by this option. Smithy will ignore trailing digits on hostnames. For
example:

    hostname-architectures:
      everest: redhat6
      titan-login: xk6
      titan-ext: xk6
      yona-login: yona
      yona: yona

Would produce the following matches:

* everest > redhat6
* titan-login1 > xk6
* titan-ext12 > xk6
* yona-login2 > yona

### download-cache

This directory is used when software archives are downloaded via formulas or
through the `smithy new --tarfile=` option.

### formula-directories

This option specifies one or more directories where formulas are stored.
If multiple directories are used then smithy will use the first formula it
finds in the order directories are specified.

### global-error-log

This file will log internal errors smithy encounters. It is usually used for
development. You can also get extra error output by setting `GLI_DEBUG=true` in
your shell.

### web-architecture-names

The `smithy publish` command outputs architecture names at the top of
description files. If you wish to use a different name this option allows for
that. For example:

    web-architecture-names:
      xk6: titan
      xk7: titan
      analysis-x64: lens

### web-root

This directory is the target output directory when running `smithy publish`

### descriptions-root

Setting this option changes the way smithy handles description files. When NOT
set smithy will expect descriptions to live inside each application folder
inside each architecture folder. For example, assuming a software-root of `/sw`
and an architecture of `xk6` smithy would expect the description files in these
locations:

    /sw
    |--- redhat6
    |  |--- subversion
    |  |  |--- 1.6.17
    |  |  |--- 1.7.8
    |  |  `--- description.markdown
    |  `--- git
    |     |--- 1.7.9.5
    |     |--- 1.8.2.1
    |     `--- description.markdown
    `--- xk6
       |--- subversion
       |  |--- 1.6.17
       |  |--- 1.7.8
       |  `--- description.markdown
       `--- git
          |--- 1.7.9.5
          |--- 1.8.2.1
          `--- description.markdown

This setup has multiple description files per application. This might make sense
if your documentation is highly dependent on the architecture. If we set
`descriptions-root` to `/sw/descriptions` smithy would expect the descriptions
in:

    /sw
    |--- redhat6
    |  |--- subversion
    |  |  |--- 1.6.17
    |  |  `--- 1.7.8
    |  `--- git
    |     |--- 1.7.9.5
    |     `--- 1.8.2.1
    |--- xk6
    |  |--- subversion
    |  |  |--- 1.6.17
    |  |  `--- 1.7.8
    |  `--- git
    |     |--- 1.7.9.5
    |     `--- 1.8.2.1
    `--- descriptions
       |--- subversion
       |  `--- description.markdown
       `--- git
          `--- description.markdown

With this we have only one description file per application.

### compilers

This option allows you to override the complier definition for creating
modulefiles. The syntax is yaml and the default values are:

    compilers:
    - :prg_env: PrgEnv-gnu
      :compiler_name: gcc
      :human_name: gnu
      :regex: !ruby/regexp /(gnu|gcc)(.*)/
      :build_name_regex: !ruby/regexp /(gnu|gcc)([\d\.]+)/
    - :prg_env: PrgEnv-pgi
      :compiler_name: pgi
      :human_name: pgi
      :regex: !ruby/regexp /(pgi)(.*)/
      :build_name_regex: !ruby/regexp /(pgi)([\d\.]+)/
    - :prg_env: PrgEnv-intel
      :compiler_name: intel
      :human_name: intel
      :regex: !ruby/regexp /(intel)(.*)/
      :build_name_regex: !ruby/regexp /(intel)([\d\.]+)/
    - :prg_env: PrgEnv-cray
      :compiler_name: cce
      :human_name: cray
      :regex: !ruby/regexp /(cce|cray)(.*)/
      :build_name_regex: !ruby/regexp /(cce|cray)([\d\.]+)/


## SEE ALSO

smithyformula(5)
